*(Abridged) Conversation between Joel and Dan (in response to the Fonc-decommission email) regarding collaboration goals & ideas.*

----

Joel Jakubovic
<br/>15 October 2017

Looks brilliant, Dan (if I may). Huge props to you for getting this
started, as Inertia forbade me and possibly the others from doing so!
(have you had contact with anyone else, or is this place as much of a
ghost town as it looks?)

Sorry I vanished, life got in the way. Rest assured, I believe in this
mission 100%.

Not sure how much I should say in useless private e-mails, rather than ...
somewhere public? (I've seen GitHub Issues used as a discussion board,
possibly not best practice)

I have my own project that I've mentioned to you, similar to your Objects,
but sufficiently different that I think it should be separate. I'll see if
I can start on the first stages of implementation, within SomethingNew, in
the coming week. At the moment I'm still deciding what to do. I like to
show my thought process, which involves writing a lot of English on my
blog, rather than code hosting platforms. Maybe I will duplicate or
summarise such material in the repository. Could I take this opportunity
to plug https://programmingmadecomplicated.wordpress.com/? I'd appreciate
your thoughts and criticism on anything relevant to this FoNC successor
thing (or otherwise).

By the way, I worry about accidental plagiarism on my part, which is one
reason I've been avoiding reading your code, as if it were some sort of
patent. But as Alan Kay once said, something like (can't find the quote):
it's better to collaborate to achieve great things rather than trying to
decide who did what first etc. So it's probably a silly thing to worry
about right? (Forgive my naivet√© -- I'm fresh out of university.)

Finally, we might want to think about a name for the mission as a whole,
for convenience. Like FoNC. No ideas from me yet though.

Once again, thanks for taking the initiative here. I look forward to being
a part of this; it feels extremely important, though sadly unknown.

----

Dan Cook
<br/>16 October 2017

...
<br/>I JUST got this started, and most of the content has been scraped from my own project, and a larger conversation with Pavel. I only just emailed the larger group about this a couple days ago.

...
<br/>I work on this stuff VERY limitedly, through whatever cracks in life I can find. No worries

...
<br/>I agree about capturing information publically. At the least, gathering together main points, projects, etc. is great; though it's also great if discussion is larger or public. Nevertheless, I'm working to scrape my emails for that info too. Agreed that **GitHub is not the best place for a "forum", but "worse is better" (e.g. something is better** than the best option that never gets implemented). Also, It might be confusing to have multiple places for "the" collaboration, and GitHub is GREAT for code-history ... though so far, **the intent might be to keep actual code & projects under separate indivisual GitHub projects** anyway. If I went with something else, maybe that would be Google Groups. And if we just want to attach a forum, https://www.cemetech.net is a greate place, because it's full of people (kids, students, and grads, and otherwise) who essentially explore the full avenue of programming & hardware inventiveness; though it is mostly (but not entirely) related to Graphing Calculators (which are like minumum models for a full computer, and you would not believe the expanse of things people have engineered for them for that reason).

...
<br/>**I think the best thing to do would be to keep projects separate, for two big reasons:**
<br/>(1) Each can have its own history and branches, etc. If we combine it all, then it all gets fudged into one ball of confusion.
<br/>(2) I think there is much more to gain by having multiple separate projects and collaborating across them, than there is from trying to force it all into one project and distill what "it" should be (codewise, goal-wise, etc.). I that kind of contention is clear if you read the history of SmallTalk (TODO: Add that to the list of resources).

(You are welcome to fulfill any oy my "TODOs", though I'm not assuming you will)

HOWEVER, I absolutely do think that **it's highly valuable to take ideas and goals from across multiple projects and distill common goals & concepts from across them**. That could help us have better aims & insights with out separate projects, but could also help some of them converge. And even for individual (or combined) projects, I'd prefer if we made if one of our general practices to create multiple branches to explore multiple avenues when there is any major split of possible approach or decision. (TODO: add some of this to the readme)

That's a great looking Blog; and I'm very interested in what you have to say (assuming that's all yours?) in that "Language isn't everything" entry (will read later). So I don't know what you mean by "plugging" that; if you mean writing about this collaboration, or thoughts on it ... sure, go for it. I also think it's great for anyone to keep up their own personal stuff (projects, blogs, etc.), and we can talk about the best way to link to our personal stuff. Perhaps it would be good to create a new page with links to forum topics or blogs (or blog entries) that are relevant, or upon which we are discussion some of these things. And/or maybe we can create an ad-hoc forum (a folder, and each file in it being an ongoing discussion. The change-history will show who contributed what & when, and any edits)

As to be a Fonc successor ... I guess that's arguably true. I mean, the mail-list is certainly where the people are originating from; but whether it's "that" or a different "thing" that was spurred from it ... I don't know which is technically accurate, or what we should or should not claim (I mean, I am not Fonc or VPRI; but arguable "we" are? I don't know) ... But whatever, it is what it is, and I just care about making this current thing a "thing". Maybe it's best to not claim another other than that we came together from the Fonc mailing-list.

It's not silly to worry about ["accidental plagiarism"] in general; but yes, my main goal is to make things happen, and **sharing openly is the best (and perhaps only) way to get something big and meaningful to happen** (I actually made a statement about this on my very first post on the topic at Cemetech: https://www.cemetech.net/forum/viewtopic.php?t=11080). We can worry about legal stuff if this goes anywhere big, and even then I'd prefer to make that bubble as inclusive as makes sense. But I think we are a long ways out from that point, and until then, I hope we can all feel free to borrow & share liberally from each other to the end of making something work.

Fresh out of University ... Excellent! That means (1) You are the right person for this, if you're this interested/involved at this point (nice blog!), and (2) Less preconcieved ideas or stuff that you have to unlearn. I tell you, it's been a pain (and almost a lost cause) to try to discuss any truly "new" stuff with any of my more seasoned (I'm a Software Engineer of 5 years now), because they've already got it "figured out", or are content with their perception of their field, and not interested in challenging it.

...
<br/>I don't know how I feel about claiming to be "Fonc" (though it's discontinued). "Worse is Better", so I just called it something at all (SomethingNew) ... If this goes anywhere meaningful, this will be something more important to discuss.

...
<br/>**Hopefully we can work together to convert a lot of thinking into doing. Though an explosion of thought is probably on the menu to start with (and going forward), and that's one of the main goals. Let's see what our combined heads can do to find the "pink plane" (and "pink thoughts") as possible (see ... almost any of Alan Kay's videos on YouTube for the reference. Look for "New" vs "News").**

----

Joel Jakubovic
<br/>16 October 2017

Yep, my blog, all a labour of love (and to keep sanity.) by 'plug' I meant "shameless advertisement of my blog", with a knowing smile. I definitely plan on talking about this project there. I'd draw your attention to most material under "programming" (some under "Nightfall" too, but many are game ideas rather than programming related) 

FoNC - just seems like what we're succeeding, to me. I don't think we should call it that, I just wanted to point out how easy it is to refer to :) but SomethingNew is fine for now I agree

Unlearning ideas is what I've been spending the past few years doing :P really sympathise with you viz. explaining in vain to others who just don't see it. I can only imagine as I am not good at explaining things in real life which is why I write. but stuff I have tried to talk about does have a tendency to be immediately shot down with arguments we're both tired of hearing! the conservatism in the field is startling at times, and I can only trust Alan Kay's assertion that people had bigger ideas back in the day... can only dream of the days of Xerox PARC eh?

----

Dan Cook
<br/>18 October 2017

I just took a look at your blog, and in highly impressed with what I saw, especially in your "purpose of this blog" and "language isn't everything" posts.

The former is looks like you are doing very much the same thing I am doing with this collaboration on github; that is, listing topics and ideas and resources to explore.

The latter showed me that we are both on 
 a remarkably similar journey. I will elaborate more on that toward the end of this email.

In both cases, In astounded at the degree of overlap of what you and I are getting to explore, and I will definitely comb through your stuff and add it to the list of concepts and goals, etc (all of which need refinement, because it's currently a sloppy "get it out there" thing).

I also found striking similarities with my discussion with Pavel. I'd say that I NEVER expected to find so much similarity to someone else in what I'm looking for; and then that was even more true for me when I looked at your blog. Unbelievable! ... This proves that this "mission" we've stumbled upon is very real and meaningful, and perhaps a natural progression for the future of software for anyone who pursues it like we have / are.

(Pavel - Do you mind if I share our exchange with Joel?)

So coming back to "language isn't everything", this is very similar to my own journey. I had been working on a never ending project to design a programming language & compiler that allowed me to do all the OO things I want, but without the restrictions of typical statically typed languages: (implicit interfaces like in golang, traits (similar to mixins. Scala traits are actually mixins), coroutines, proper closures, etc) ... but most importantly to me, the ability to apply amy code at compile-time as a way to use code to describe/generate code (not dissimilar to the concept of LISP macros)..

And THEN I came across the works of Alan Kay, and then Bret Victor, and then suddenly realized that programming languages are just frameworks that limit how we make programs. What if instead we treated language features like libraries rather than frameworks, and mixed and matched whatever we want for each project? What if instead of using a grammer and a compiler to generate constructs, we wrote program-generating programs, which use an API (i.e. functions and objects) to create those constructs directly? And at that point, why bother having a language that distinguishes between compile-time and runtime? Really, it's all just scripts. (Think of uncompiled source code as a program that makes an executable program, and the compiler as the interpreter of that program).

Anyway, I realized that is not about languages, it's about tools, processes, and representations that are as dynamic and fluid as possible, and that capture and convey the right kind of representations that are best suited for the task. For example, a living manipulatable object model in place of textual code, and a better interface for it.

----

Pavel Ba≈æant
<br/>18 October 2017

Feel free to share our conversation :-)

----

Joel Jakubovic
<br/>19 October 2017

I'm still combing through your discussion with Pavel.

I will say that, from what I've seen, I am 90% certain that you and I have
pretty much exactly the same software creation in mind. The key is that
Pavel seems to still be a fan of language, whereas you and I both seem to
be rebelling against that (obviously in a carefully considered,
non-absolute sense). And all three of us recognise the downsides of text,
non-introspection, non-self-modification, etc.

What I liked most was that you too have been astounded at Open Reusable
Object Models (OROM) and the COLAs paper, yet at the same time dismayed
that it all has to be imagined in your head when it comes down to
implementation via language!

My BootstrapLab project, which I am *almost* getting to writing about,
partly came from trying to understand and sketch implementation of OROM's
"id" object system. I noticed how much more informative, and easier, it
was to draw box-and-field data structure diagrams on paper, rather than
reading (or even copying out) the sample C implementation at the end. I
thought: all that needs to be done, is to allow computing to be
bootstrapped from the ground up *once again* - only this time, we will
make full use of graphics, interactivity and abundant performance that the
early pioneers couldn't even dream of.

My initial idea was to begin with an appropriate, editable visualisation
of the memory of an empty OS process (as that is where I am forced to
start; short of developing on a new, empty computer with no OS). Your
Objects project, if I understand correctly, doesn't insist on starting at
the "bare metal", and it's worth continuing to pursue both of these
directions, as well as any others as you say.

It has to be more than coincidence that we've been converging together. I
just think that if you refuse to rationalise the status quo, you
eventually end up discovering Alan Kay, Bret Victor and co. at some point.

What caused you to start on your "never ending project"? For me, it's my
string of failed hobbyist game projects - a coming-together (read:
clusterf**k) of graphics, concurrency, dynamism, flexible modelling,
everything that sucks about programming :) but unlike seemingly everyone
else, I resisted the urge to rationalise the pain and always strove for
something better, which led me here. I assume you were similar.

> (Think of uncompiled source code as a program that makes an executable program, and the compiler as the interpreter of that program).

Hey, I never saw that. Great insight! Will play on my mind for weeks to
come...

**Having skimmed the conversation you forwarded me, I can definitively say
that it should be out there somewhere, for others to see. Assuming Pavel
agrees. There are some real gems in there. This also goes for other things
you've said to me; it's often hard to put these things into words, and I
think you've succeeded on several occasions, which spares others the same
effort. (btw, consider all my correspondence publishable by default. I
will specifically request not to, if I feel differently)**

**I also think "historical and motivational stories" are vastly underrated
as a tool for seeing what others see, so if you can describe your journey
as I am trying to describe mine on my blog, then that would be helpful for
others.** Of course, as I've realised, it's not quite as useful (for us)
trying to reach our goals, so it is lower priority :) As you and Pavel
observed, being able to *show* a working instance of this vision will make
doomed discussions with naysayers, and complex frameworks of
justification, obsolete.

Thank you so much for your kind comments. It's reassuring and encouraging
that there really *are* others who are on the same wavelength. Sometimes
I've wondered if *I'm* actually the crazy one, and that these really are
just unattainable ideals. But this collaboration makes firm my conviction
that it really is a cause worth pursuing.

It'll take time, but there's no rush... pretty exciting :D
